Thanks, everybody. Okay, so my talk is entitled Asynchronous Programming in R, but I have
to give a little disclaimer. It's sort of, but not really about asynchronous programming
in R. When I was developing the materials for this talk, I realized I couldn't... Asynchronous
programming is such a huge topic, I would have a hard time really explaining it in the
way that I found satisfying in 20 minutes. And then I thought about all these other topics
that come along with asynchronous programming, in my experience and the stuff that I work
on. So there's also parallelism, concurrency, and event-driven programming. So let me define
these for you in case you're not really familiar with these. So asynchronous programming is
when you call a function, it doesn't block. So normally, when you're writing your R code
and you're running it, it steps through, it does each thing, and if you do something that
takes a long time, like, let's say, you tell R to go download a file, it stops there, and
then once the file is downloaded, it continues and your script continues to run. In an asynchronous
program, you might, if there's an asynchronous download, what it would do is, you're essentially,
it would say, hey, go download this file, some other thing in the computer, go download
the file, and the code would keep running, and then later you'd check, hey, is my file
downloaded, or maybe you might say, or it might run a callback and tell you, hey, the
file is done now. That's asynchronous programming. Parallelism is when you do multiple things
at the same time. That's very common on modern computers with multiple cores. Concurrency
is when it seems like you're doing multiple things at the same time, but you might not
actually be doing multiple things at the same time. So if you're familiar with JavaScript
in a web browser, that's single-threaded, and it can seem like a web page is doing a
lot of things at once, but it's really splitting its time in between different tasks and switching
between them very quickly, so it just seems like it's doing things in parallel. And finally,
there's event-driven programming, where you have events that occur, there might be some
outside signal, and that causes some code to run. So I was thinking about this, and
asynchronous programming was too big, and so I thought I'd try to talk about all of
these a little bit, or at least actually a common thread that runs through all of them,
which is a package called Later. And Later was originally created by Joe Chang, and I
don't know if it's a coincidence, but it was a conversation with him that helped me settle
on this topic. So thanks, Joe. All right, so I'm gonna show you a demo here of... Let's
see if I can make this go away. Try to make this large enough to... Well, it'll be sort
of... Wow. It's semi-visible. All right, so let's say... Well, you don't have to see the
specific code, the exact code here. Let's say I'm creating a data frame called data,
and I've populated it with some X and Y values, and this plot magically appeared in RStudio
here. And if I modify it, so I square all the X values, that plot redraws, and now I
have a parabola shape here. And I can do the same with Y, and if I restore data to what
it was before, it re-plots again. So there's something going on here. It's not any magic
from RStudio, the IDE, but it involves later. This is... And what you're seeing here is
sort of, at least from the user perspective, this is event-driven programming. So I'm not
telling it to re-plot every time I change data, but every time I change data, it causes
this plotting code to re-execute. And I ran that, actually, ahead of time, before I started
this talk, and I'll show it to you in a little bit. But let's talk about... Let's talk about
what the later package does. So later provides something called an event loop. An event loop
is a queue of functions that will run in the future, and it's very similar to setTimeout
in JavaScript, if you're familiar with JavaScript. And if this is confusing to you, I will show
you a very simple example of how later is used. So you load the later package. I'm setting
a flag to tell me when I'm... To signal when something is done. And then I say, later,
run this function here, which prints out a message and updates the flag, after five seconds.
And then at the end, I'll say, while I'm not done, run now. It means keep running these
functions that are in this event loop, in this queue. So let's do this. Let's run this
stuff here. And you won't be surprised to see that after five seconds, it prints out
this message. Hello, world. And I know there's people out there who have already figured
out how to write this in about six lines of code to implement this. So this part is not
really that difficult. But what later... What you might be a little bit more surprised to
see is that if I run this same code here, and I don't do run now, and we wait five seconds,
it will also print hello, world. So later has some C code that runs. And when your R
console is idle, when the call stack is empty and you're not running anything else, it will
continue running this event loop. Okay. So that plot watching code that I showed... Or
that... You saw the plot watcher before. And this is the code. So what it does is, first...
It's pretty simple. So I'm just setting data to null and the last value to null. And then
I have this function called plot watch. And if the data's not null, and if it's different
from the last value, then plot it, and then update the last value. So that's all really
standard R code. The thing that's different is, right here, I call later plot watch. So
this function is rescheduling itself to run after a quarter second. And then after we
define the function, we have to kick it off. We have to get it started by invoking the
function once. And then... And it's doing what's sort of... I guess you might call it
a polling loop, where it just keeps running every quarter of a second. And every time
data changes, it executes the plotting code. So later also has a C API. This is important
when you're doing a lot of this... When you're doing asynchronous programming. Because a
lot of times, you have to interface with external libraries. So from C code, you can call later
to schedule a C function to execute. There's a C function later. And that C function that
you scheduled to execute can in turn call an R function. And also, another very important
point is that this function... The later function is thread safe. So you can have another thread
schedule something to run. It can schedule an R function to run.
Okay. So that's a brief overview of later. What it does is pretty simple, but it unlocks
a lot of possibilities. So here's some real world uses of later. And I'm gonna show you
some stuff... Some demos and explain how some of these things work.
So one thing that we've worked on recently is a WebSocket client. WebSocket is a protocol
for basically for communicating between computers. Through a... Well, through a fancy web server.
So this is how it's used. So I create a WebSocket. I say WebSocket new and connect to the server.
And then I tell it... Hey, when you receive a message, invoke this function. So this is
event driven programming here. But it doesn't actually call this function right away. And
what it does... This function will print out, hey, I've received this... Whatever the message is.
All right. So I've set up that event handler. And then at the end, I can say... I can tell
it to send hello world. So let's see this in action. Now, what it's doing is not very
surprising. Will not be very surprising. So if you haven't... If you can't see it, this
is the same code that you saw before. And so I sent hello world, and what I received
back is that same string reversed. So it's talking to a WebSocket server that takes a
string, reverses it, and sends it back. So it's just doing this really basic transformation
on it. All right. Now, the way that this works internally
is used as polling, similar to that plot watcher that we... Or the data watcher that we had
before. So we have this arrow representing time. And several times per second, we're
polling and we're checking for any... If there's any input or output that has happened on this
WebSocket. Now, at some arbitrary point in time, in R, you might tell it to send a message.
Send hello world. And that gets... That puts it in this output queue. But that output queue
isn't handled until this polling event here. And when we get to the polling event, that
actually calls out to a C++ library that handles all this input and output stuff. And it sends
a message to the server. When that happens, the server sends a message back. And then
that message sits in the input queue until the next polling event happens. And when that
occurs, then it calls the on message handler. And it prints out they have received this
hello world reversed. And I just... In this particular slide, the blue indicates that
this is something that was triggered by the polling event that later provided.
Okay. So that's how the WebSocket package works. At least that's how the CRAN version
of WebSocket works. On GitHub, there's actually... The development version of WebSocket has been
changed to use threads. Actually, let me show you one thing real quick about this. So if
you're familiar with this sort of programming, you know that polling is not the ideal way
to do this. There's a little bit of latency that can occur between these events here.
And it also... If you're doing a lot of polling really quick, it can use CPU time that shouldn't
be... That really shouldn't be used. But it's simple to implement. So the development version
of WebSocket is threaded. This is... And so there's two threads. There's this main R thread.
And then it launches another thread that handles the input and output. All right. So if I tell
it to send a message from... And that happens in R. What it does is it calls the C function...
Or C++ function send, which is thread safe. Which tells the IO thread, hey, I want you
to send this message. And the IO thread at this point will be idle. And so it will deal
with this request right away. Send the message to the server. Server sends something back.
And if the IO thread is idle then, it will immediately use later to tell the R thread...
This is the C function later. To tell R thread, hey, handle this message that I just got.
And if R thread is sitting idle at that point, it will print it out. If R thread is busy
at that time, like represented by that red bar there, then it will... It will wait until
it's done doing whatever computation it's doing. And then it will handle that queued
function. All right. So these are two common ways of handling input and output. Asynchronous
IO. With polling and with threads. All right.
Another use that we have is a web server called HTPUV. This package, you might have heard
of it before. It has an awkward name. It underlies Shiny and Plumber. And to start a web server,
it's actually very simple. You just say start server. You give it the port you want to listen
to it on. And then this function here, which it's a callback that gets invoked when an
event happens. An incoming request occurs. So when you get an incoming HTTP request,
it calls this function and passes in this object called rec. And in this case, I'm just
having it create a web page that has the time and the path that was requested. And then
it returns some other HTTP stuff along with that. So you can imagine that you can use
this in all sorts of different ways. It just will execute an R function whenever you get
an HTTP request. So I'll show you this real quick in action. What it will do is also not
surprising, since I've already talked about it. Gives you the time and the path that was
requested. So that was just slash. I could say R studio conf. And then it prints out
that path there. All right. Now I'm just gonna show you some other cool stuff. Some fun stuff.
So I also started before this... Before I started doing the talk, I started up another
HTTP via application, which provides a remote R console, a REPL. So I can say, you know,
1, 1 plus 1, sum of 1 through 10. And this is causing R code to execute. So this is actually
using WebSocket connection. It's... The web browser sends this string over the WebSocket.
And then the R process gets the string, it evaluates it, captures the output, and then
sends it back. So that's what's happening here. The interesting thing about this is
it's actually running in the same R process that we've been doing all the rest of this
stuff. So if I change data to be... That's why I say data X... Data X squared. That did
not work at all. Oh, there it goes. Okay. All right. So this is running in the same
R process. All right. And of course, you're familiar with Shiny. Shiny is based on HTTP
so I can run this Shiny app here, which is displaying the same data. And I can... If
I randomize it, it'll... You know, if I click this button to randomize, it does... You've
seen this sort of thing with a Shiny app. And again, these are connected here. So when
I randomize the data, I'm using poor Shiny programming practices where I'm modifying
a global variable. But for this demo, it's good. And it's changing that plot right there.
Okay. So that's a taste of some of the things that are possible. There's one other thing
I want to show. Using a package called Chromote, which is a headless Chrome web browser package,
which uses a lot of asynchronous programming. And I won't go into depth about it right now.
I just want to show some other fun stuff that you can do. So I can start a Chromote session.
I'll navigate to the same application. And I'll take a screenshot of it. And when it
takes a screenshot, it actually will cause that screenshot to appear in this viewer pane
here. This is not the Shiny app here. This is a screenshot of a Shiny app. If you see,
I can drag this around here. And just to prove to you that it's actually... Oops. I tried
to run it in RStudio, but RStudio console is blocked. I have to run it over here. Because
this one is driven by later. This is... You can get a view into the headless browser.
And then you can sort of interact with it here. I can click on randomize over there.
And then if I take a screenshot of it again, you'll see that... Sorry. I did it again.
Okay. If I take a screenshot again, you'll see that that button is sort of grayed, which
indicates that it was selected, which is what I was doing over there. All right. So that's
the fun demos. All right. So let's get back to what we saw here. So we saw this WebSocket
server that reverses strings. Web server that shows you the time. Web server with this remote
R console, which you can use while you're running a Shiny application. Running a Shiny
app. We had this plot data watcher. And we had this headless Chrome client. All of these
use later. That's what makes it all possible for them to run concurrently. And this is
all in one R process. Okay. So one thing... I took a look at the later CRAN page. And
I looked at the packages that we're using later. And one thing I noticed was that even
though it's been out for a couple of years, there's not that many packages that use it.
And all of them are maintained by people that work at RStudio. So I'm hoping that...
We have a lot of this knowledge internally from... We've got battle scars working on
this stuff. But hopefully... Hopefully if you're working on async programming or parallelism
or concurrency, this will be useful for you. And I have the URL here. It's not... The materials
aren't actually up there right now, but they will be. Thank you.
Thanks, Winston. That was fascinating. I can assure you that I am using your work. I have
promote writing on a scheduled basis to take photographs of the work my colleagues are
doing. For those of you that are leaving, we are just carrying on with questions. So
please do so quietly if you can. Question number one. Does Latit deal with the issues
of tail call stack optimization that could arise from the recursive event loop format?
It does not. That's actually a great question. You have to be... I wanted to mention it,
but I didn't have time. If you're going to be calling the function itself, you have to
make sure not to create any closures that will keep increasing the depth of the call
stack. So you have to create a function outside of your function that you're calling.
And the second question is, if Latit is running and you want to run another... What happened?
Oh, there we go. And you want to run another line of code, does the new line you are running
jump ahead of later, or does it wait those five seconds to run?
So if you... It will jump ahead of later. So after five seconds have elapsed, even whatever
you've written, whatever you've done before, it won't wait an extra five seconds. It will
wait for five seconds total, unless R is occupied at the moment, that callback would occur.
Thank you. And last question. It's getting quite a few votes. Is there a way to prioritize
different asynchronous streams? Is there a way to prioritize different asynchronous
streams? That, I'm not sure I fully understand the question, so I'm sorry I can't answer
that. If you asked a question, did you want to
shout out and clarify? No? Okay. Winton, thank you very much. This was fascinating.
Thank you.